Okay.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to week four of Introduction to Linear Algebra.
Um, I'll leave the QR code for attendance.
NOTE CONF
Just a few more seconds.
If anyone hasn't managed to scan it already.
NOTE CONF
But as we will see, week four is a very
packed week and a very important one because we start
NOTE CONF
talking about determinants and invertibility and which are all things,
all topics that essentially will serve as the basis for
NOTE CONF
the big thing that's coming up, which is matrix diagonalization,
eigenvalues, eigenvector and everything else.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I hope everyone has managed to take the attendance
NOTE CONF
And let's start with a quick overview of what we
are discussing this this week together.
NOTE CONF
So as you as you are familiar with now, the
week is divided in sort of two parts.
NOTE CONF
You have two readings and two lectures.
And so today we will look at the definition of
NOTE CONF
determinants.
And we will look at cofactor expansion.
NOTE CONF
We will look at some basic property of determinants and
determinants of spatial matrices.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand is something wrong.
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Whereas tomorrow we will focus more on um some other
NOTE CONF
things, which is how to use determinants to check whether
or not a matrix is invertible and how to calculate
NOTE CONF
explicitly the inverse using the aggregate matrix.
There's plenty of material about this, but in the reading,
NOTE CONF
and I also created a few videos that sort of
summarise all of these topics.
NOTE CONF
Yes, I see hands.
There's no question.
NOTE CONF
Um.
That's okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm not the manager of that.
The core secretary is.
NOTE CONF
So we will try again at the end of the
lecture.
NOTE CONF
But now I need to go to go on.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Anything else?
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's start straight with hopefully this book club would
will work.
NOTE CONF
Um, so just make sure you sign in for, uh,
for the time being.
NOTE CONF
Um, this should be the same code, by the way.
It's just one is embedded in the in the slide,
NOTE CONF
and the other one isn't.
Um, and we will start with some sort of, um,
NOTE CONF
very simple getting to know the tool a little bit.
Um, question.
NOTE CONF
You should be seeing question one already, which should be,
uh, filling the gap question.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm going to give you a minute or
two to make club work and to, um.
NOTE CONF
Start thinking about what you're reading and submit the answers.
If anyone has any problem with this book club, please
NOTE CONF
tell me sooner rather than later because otherwise this one
not working would be a problem.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I do not have a timer for the bookclub question,
NOTE CONF
but I will wrap them up myself.
Okay, so a lot of questions are in.
NOTE CONF
And, um, okay, let's go over them together.
The question asks is the definition of the cofactor cij.
NOTE CONF
I represents the row or column while j represents.
Well, it's going to be the other one obviously.
NOTE CONF
And really we could, we could choose, um, whatever.
We like to answer this question, but we need to
NOTE CONF
stay consistent throughout the course.
We can decide to have rows first and column seconds
NOTE CONF
or column first row seconds, that's fine.
But because the entire mathematical community has sort of agreed
NOTE CONF
that the first number refers to the row and the
second number refers to the column, then it's just a
NOTE CONF
useful to go with that, because then everything we read
of the of the of the book, everything that we
NOTE CONF
lecture prepare in the lecture notes, we'll use that convention.
So in a matrix, in a matrix A and I
NOTE CONF
represent the row that we're looking at.
And J represents the column.
NOTE CONF
And that was the easy part.
The more difficult bit was the second one which um
NOTE CONF
ask what are the dimension of the cofactor?
And uh, I see that I have a great number
NOTE CONF
of answers.
I have n and minus one.
NOTE CONF
I am J all over the place.
What is the cofactor?
NOTE CONF
How is the cofactor defined?
The cofactor is something, but the crucial thing is the
NOTE CONF
part that the cofactor is a determinant.
It's the determinant of the uh a j a ij
NOTE CONF
matrix, which is the one that is stripped of the
ith column and the jth um and the jth row.
NOTE CONF
So the cofactor is a scalar number.
It has dimension one times one okay.
NOTE CONF
The reduced matrix will have dimensions m minus one and
minus one.
NOTE CONF
That is correct.
But the cofactor is defined as its determinant.
NOTE CONF
And so for that reason um C I j of
a will be.
NOTE CONF
In.
Have you seen this notation here before?
NOTE CONF
R to the power of one times one.
It's essentially means that it's a it's a single number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Doesn't have any columns.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't have any row.
It's a scalar.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Hopefully that clarifies things a little bit.
NOTE CONF
Um, because we're going to use that in the, in
the rest of the lecture quite extensively.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Please don't log out of book club in this lecture
NOTE CONF
because I haven't copied the QR all the time.
So while we while we are still at the beginning,
NOTE CONF
I'm happy to go back and show you the QR
to log in again.
NOTE CONF
But as we go further down, um, it would take
me quite a long time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Second question.
True or false?
NOTE CONF
Let's keep investigating.
Um, the cofactor and how the cofactor is related to
NOTE CONF
the determinant.
We've seen that the the determinant of the matrix and
NOTE CONF
the cofactors are, um, are strictly related.
We've seen an important theorem which states that we can
NOTE CONF
take the cofactor expansion over all rows and all columns,
and we get the determinant.
NOTE CONF
And so I'm going to update the question on bookclub.
Hopefully that should update it for you as well.
NOTE CONF
Uh just going to show you the the QR once
more.
NOTE CONF
If you are having trouble perhaps you've been locked out.
And in the meantime I'll give you some time to
NOTE CONF
think.
But what I'm saying is the determinant.
NOTE CONF
We can write as the sum over.
For example, am I taking the sum of our column
NOTE CONF
or a row there?
Raise your hand if you think I'm taking the expansion
NOTE CONF
over a row.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Raise your hand if you think I'm taking it over
the column.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Those are still too few hands, so let's think again
NOTE CONF
and we will vote again in 30s.
Anyone who thinks I'm taking the the expansion of a
NOTE CONF
row now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anyone who thinks I'm taking it over a column.
Okay, so the key, the key thing to see here
NOTE CONF
is how does that some behaves that some changes.
The second element of the indices of the of the
NOTE CONF
matrix.
So it changes the j.
NOTE CONF
And I'm and I'm expanding over the element I, j
and j refers to the column as we've just seen
NOTE CONF
in question one.
And so that may be a little bit confusing.
NOTE CONF
But if you think about that, the column is changing
all the time.
NOTE CONF
And the row which is expressed by IE stays constant
instead.
NOTE CONF
So that is a deceptive.
It's a correct but a little bit deceptive.
NOTE CONF
You have to think about it a little bit.
Um, because the column is changing, I am actually expanding
NOTE CONF
over the ith row because if you think about what
that would, that expression really is, is something as a
NOTE CONF
Um, I one times the determinant of a i1 plus
a I2 plus a i3, and so on and so
NOTE CONF
forth.
And so as you can see, these is just the
NOTE CONF
ith row of the matrix.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Back to the main question now is that the right
NOTE CONF
uh, the right formula for the cofactor expansion.
Let me see.
NOTE CONF
How's it going?
Oh, split down in the middle.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Since we are so split, I would like to to
take a minute and discuss with your neighbours Why do
NOTE CONF
you think your opinion is the correct one?
All right.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to mute myself for a minute and hopefully.
Okay, let's see how we are doing now via a
NOTE CONF
raise of hands once again.
If you think that is the correct excuse me.
NOTE CONF
If you think that that is the correct expansion expansion
for the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Now raise your hands.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Down.
If you think it's not, raise your hands.
NOTE CONF
It is not.
That is correct.
NOTE CONF
And again these expressions are tricky right.
They're they're they're deceptive.
NOTE CONF
If they're I would have put if I put their
I j psi of a then that would have been
NOTE CONF
the right the right expansion.
But here I just put the determinant of the minor
NOTE CONF
matrix.
And so what am I missing.
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
The sign.
NOTE CONF
The sign of the cofactor I forgot to put in
here.
NOTE CONF
And that's.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The cofactor expansion down.
And as you can see, it looks much the same.
NOTE CONF
But when we really go to the to the origin
of how we expand the determinants, we have three terms.
NOTE CONF
And then what we do is we collect the first
and the third one and we call it the the
NOTE CONF
cofactor.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So in there I've always I've also put the definition
of the cofactor implicitly if you want whatever multiplies I
NOTE CONF
j to get the determinant into that sum that will
be the cofactor.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these exercises are quite.
NOTE CONF
Quite tricky.
Um, because matrices are trickier than numbers, right?
NOTE CONF
There's much more structure about matrices.
There's much more results that that we're going to see
NOTE CONF
in this course than on numbers alone.
So we need to tread carefully when we engage with
NOTE CONF
matrices.
It's very important to make sure that you're following the
NOTE CONF
results, um, quite closely because even something that may look
like it's correct, like the expression above, which is like
NOTE CONF
very similar to the correct one, but it's slightly off.
Um, it may not work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions so far?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The next exercise is a little bit, um, more structured
in the sense that, uh, I don't know if you've
NOTE CONF
done this during the reading, but one of the suggestions
that I really have for anyone approaching determinants and cofactor
NOTE CONF
expansion for the for the first time is trying to
get used to them as much as possible.
NOTE CONF
And so I've set aside four minutes, five minutes in
this lecture for you to practice on a three by
NOTE CONF
three matrix.
So what I would like you to do is to
NOTE CONF
write down the cofactor, the determinant cofactor expansion for that
matrix and choosing two different rows, and then show that
NOTE CONF
you get the same result.
As a spoiler alert.
NOTE CONF
I'll be doing that for the first and second rows.
So if you do that then you can check against
NOTE CONF
my work.
If you do something else and you still find that
NOTE CONF
they're the same.
That's still a pretty solid suggestion that you're that you
NOTE CONF
have done things correctly as an extra if you finish
early, um, or maybe at home, because calculating three in
NOTE CONF
a row gets pretty boring.
You can try and prove that also along the column
NOTE CONF
and everything works okay.
That is the big result of the reading for this,
NOTE CONF
for this, for this lecture that we are not able
to prove yet.
NOTE CONF
If you notice in the in the in the book,
there's a note that, well that says something like we
NOTE CONF
we were going to prove this result in section 3.6
I think, which is in a few weeks.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have to take it for granted for now,
NOTE CONF
but we can check on some special cases.
I don't know what's happening with the connection to my
NOTE CONF
tablet, but I can plug it in again and see
how it goes.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm going to start my solution to this.
If you haven't finished, that's fine.
NOTE CONF
You can catch up as we go.
Um, okay, so this is the first, uh, cofactor expansion
NOTE CONF
along the first row.
What I've done is exactly applying the first formula where
NOTE CONF
I was equal to one.
I controls the row.
NOTE CONF
And as you can see in the first sum, the
second index of the of the elements that multiply the
NOTE CONF
determinant changes, and so the row is going through the
three rows of the matrix.
NOTE CONF
And then I expand the smaller determinants which for a
two by two matrix we know we can write out
NOTE CONF
explicitly.
And then I expand everything okay.
NOTE CONF
So that is the correct hopefully expression of the determinant
of A.
NOTE CONF
And the result that we have seen was that if
I do it along another row then everything works out.
NOTE CONF
And if you do it for another row, um, you
get that expression there.
NOTE CONF
And how do we check that they are the same?
Well, we need to check that they contain the same,
NOTE CONF
um, the same, uh, triple products.
And I'm just going to highlight a few and then
NOTE CONF
I'll let you finish this, For example, the triple product
of the three diagonal members are here and here.
NOTE CONF
This triple product here, which contains minus A1 one, also
appears here.
NOTE CONF
I think that's the same.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Um, the third one here contains minus A1221, three three.
That's this one here.
NOTE CONF
Oh, you know what?
Let's just do them all.
NOTE CONF
It's not that long.
122331 is here.
NOTE CONF
One, three with plus must be this one because the
other one has minus.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, it's the same.
And then the last one is here okay.
NOTE CONF
So the theorem in this particular case is working if
we expand over different rows Um, then everything, um, everything,
NOTE CONF
uh, provides us with the with the same correct result.
So in the summary that I was presenting to you
NOTE CONF
earlier about the cofactor expansion and the determined.
Sorry, that is shaking.
NOTE CONF
I don't know what was happening.
Um, which was this one?
NOTE CONF
I need to add a little remark here that also
says we can actually do it however we like.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why is this important?
NOTE CONF
It's important because if you have a row that is
mostly zeros or mostly ones, but zeros are better.
NOTE CONF
If we choose that row or column, then our expansion
is greatly, greatly simplified because whenever an element is zero,
NOTE CONF
the whole term, including the determinant of the matrix multiplies.
It goes away.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Um, so it's it's a practically important result.
NOTE CONF
In that sense, it helps us calculate determinants a little
bit easier.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about this?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Note that this is not a proof.
NOTE CONF
We've proven it for two rows in a three by
three matrix.
NOTE CONF
If I were to ask you to prove it for
a five by five matrix, then we'd be spending the
NOTE CONF
whole hour just doing my nodes, minor determinants and then
calculating everything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So okay.
NOTE CONF
Question five.
Um, now the question starts to become, in my opinion,
NOTE CONF
at least a little bit more interesting.
Um, we're sort of approaching assessment territory here, you know,
NOTE CONF
so far was just some definitions here.
We need to think about it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have that matrix M which has that structure
NOTE CONF
there.
We have some numbers that I haven't specified but I
NOTE CONF
want those numbers to be non zeros.
So d1 d2 and d3 are non zeros.
NOTE CONF
And then we have zeros below them and above them.
Um we can choose.
NOTE CONF
We have uh if we choose them positive numbers we
get matrix A some some positive numbers.
NOTE CONF
If we choose them equal to zero we get matrix
B, and if we choose them negative we get matrix
NOTE CONF
C.
And my question to you again refer to the book
NOTE CONF
club is I'm not am I showing it.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Um, what is the relation between the determinants of the
three matrices.
NOTE CONF
You will have a few options to choose from.
Is there anything we can say?
NOTE CONF
Do we have enough information to make an informed decision
about how the three determinants sort of work and or
NOTE CONF
compare against each other, or we don't have enough information?
I'll give you a minute to discuss and come up
NOTE CONF
with your with your solution to this.
Okay, let's see how the first answers are coming in.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Um, there's a pretty clear majority that thinks that the
NOTE CONF
three.
Oh, I forgot the last determinant there.
NOTE CONF
That should be determinant of C, obviously.
Sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
But you correctly guess the answer despite my error.
Well what is going on here.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone summarise in a few words what's happening here?
Yeah, just just go for it.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The determinant is the product of the entry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It doesn't matter what the start values are.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Absolutely correct.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
The key observation here is that if we take those
values to be zero, we get a diagonal matrix.
NOTE CONF
If we take them to be anything else, we get
an upper triangular matrix.
NOTE CONF
But the second key observation is that for both the
formula to calculate the determinant, the simplified version of the
NOTE CONF
determinant is the same.
It's just the product of the three diagonal well, the
NOTE CONF
n diagonal terms in general, in this case three.
So you have correctly identified that, uh, that is indeed,
NOTE CONF
um, that it's it's indeed irrelevant whether we assign zero
or non-zero values to the stars up there.
NOTE CONF
And so these are the two propositions that were in
one of the videos, um, literally taken from the same
NOTE CONF
deck of slides.
Um, and that works.
NOTE CONF
Even if we had put the stars on the lower
triangle, because for both upper and lower triangular matrices, um,
NOTE CONF
the formula still holds.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And if you have seen the video, I make a
NOTE CONF
comment.
I say because of this, diagonal matrices are nice.
NOTE CONF
And actually triangular matrices are just as nice as, uh,
diagonal matrices if we have one of them calculating the
NOTE CONF
determinant.
I'm so sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, calculating the determinant.
The determinant is not about taking a minor determinant and
NOTE CONF
combining them and expanding.
We just do a multiplication of a few numbers and
NOTE CONF
we're done.
So 1st May think, well, we have seen how to
NOTE CONF
reduce a matrix to an upper triangular matrix.
Right.
NOTE CONF
What's the keyword for doing that.
How how did we call the result of that of
NOTE CONF
that operation.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Just scream it if you have it.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The row operation that puts it in row echelon form.
That is an upper an upper triangular matrix.
NOTE CONF
So one might think, well, if I don't know how
to calculate the determinant, but I know how to put
NOTE CONF
it in row echelon form.
Could I do a row echelon form and then just
NOTE CONF
multiply the diagonal and find the determinant.
The answer is yes.
NOTE CONF
And that is the next exercise that I invite you
to do.
NOTE CONF
This is not this is a matrix that already starts
to be a little bit in row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
So you can see I put some zeros and some
easy numbers in the lower part.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I would like you to try to put
in row echelon form for the sake of time.
NOTE CONF
I know that you're very familiar with that, but I'm
going to give you the row operation so we don't
NOTE CONF
waste time with that.
And I want you to calculate the determinant by using
NOTE CONF
the row echelon form okay.
So again it's not a massive amount of computation but
NOTE CONF
it is some computations.
So I'm going to give you two more minutes.
NOTE CONF
I'll come around and then we will wrap up this
question together.
NOTE CONF
Any questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
I had muted myself now.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so as usual, lectures are very short.
I'm sorry but I need to move on if we
NOTE CONF
have done.
Oh okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
I put it in the other order okay.
NOTE CONF
And we know that these type of uh, of operations
are allowed because they don't change the solutions of the
NOTE CONF
system, right?
That's week one, Ila.
NOTE CONF
Do they change the determinant?
Raise your hand if yes.
NOTE CONF
Raise your hand if no.
Right.
NOTE CONF
They do, but they do it in a predictable way.
So we can account for the change that we introduced
NOTE CONF
by doing that and then go back and correct for
that.
NOTE CONF
And what I mean is this.
And when we do so it's a valid method to
NOTE CONF
calculate the determinant by putting everything in row echelon form.
But we need to be careful about how we're changing
NOTE CONF
the determinant.
So this these are the three rules.
NOTE CONF
As we've seen in one of the videos.
If you swap two columns or two rows the determinant
NOTE CONF
changes sign.
So whenever we swap columns or rows we need to
NOTE CONF
remember that we are introducing a times minus one into
the determinant.
NOTE CONF
If we're multiplying a row again, that was one of
the basic results of the determinant one of the basic
NOTE CONF
properties.
Then if we multiply a row or a column, we
NOTE CONF
multiply the determinant by the same factor.
Same needs to be different than zero here.
NOTE CONF
I cannot multiply.
I mean I can multiply something by zero.
NOTE CONF
But then I get the determinant equal to zero and
I never recover.
NOTE CONF
So it's not a smart move.
And instead if I combine two or more rows then
NOTE CONF
it doesn't matter.
Linear combinations of rows or columns do not change the
NOTE CONF
determinant.
Okay, with that in mind.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully I have done the calculations through variational form correctly.
We should check with one of you probably, but let's
NOTE CONF
assume that this is what we get.
Um.
NOTE CONF
The determinant of this matrix is just minus four, because
it's just the product of the elements on the diagonal.
NOTE CONF
And if you remember which operations we've done, which were
these ones.
NOTE CONF
Um, the first three are linear combination.
So we don't change the determinant at all.
NOTE CONF
But the last one we have to swap the last
and the second to last row, because otherwise the minus
NOTE CONF
two two would spoil the lower triangular property of the
matrix.
NOTE CONF
And so if this matrix that the reduced row echelon
form of the first one has determined and minus four,
NOTE CONF
then the original determinant.
How to be four okay, because we changed its sign
NOTE CONF
when we swapped the rows at the last step okay.
So this is another option for calculating determinants a little
NOTE CONF
bit more effectively and more and with less probability of
making an algebra mistake, probably then just going through the
NOTE CONF
whole expansion for big matrices.
Note that this one was a 4x4, and so in
NOTE CONF
principle, a 4x4 is very hard to do.
Um, to do directly.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's not hard, it's just long.
And the chances of making mistakes are plentiful.
NOTE CONF
And with that in mind, the next exercise.
Can we do a five by five?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's no way we can fit the calculation of general
NOTE CONF
determinants five by five by the end of the lecture.
Like that's just something that we cannot do.
NOTE CONF
So we need to do something a little bit smarter
and use one of the properties that that we've seen
NOTE CONF
in the, in the reading and in the videos.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um.
can you see how to do that?
NOTE CONF
Now, again, only for the interest of time.
Um, I'm going to give you one minute to think
NOTE CONF
about it, and then I'm going to spoil the result
for you.
NOTE CONF
But give it a think.
Look at the structure of the matrix.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you can manipulate a little bit and obtain something
that's a little bit more reasonable than doing a five
NOTE CONF
by five or in one go.
Remember, whenever you do a five by five, at every
NOTE CONF
step of the expansion, you get a determinant 4x4, which
you need to expand again.
NOTE CONF
And then so you get five determinants 4x4 each expanded
four times.
NOTE CONF
That's 20.
And those are determinants three by three.
NOTE CONF
So you get 60 terms to compute.
If you were doing that directly you can cut it
NOTE CONF
down by expanding along the first column for example which
has two zeros.
NOTE CONF
But it's it's still going to leave you with a
lot of algebra to do.
NOTE CONF
So.
What do you see in the structure of that matrix?
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The third and fourth columns we get a block of
zeros.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it's not quite in block format, but almost if
NOTE CONF
we swap the the third and the fourth column, we
get a upper triangular block matrix, a matrix which has
NOTE CONF
it's divided in blocks.
And the lower block and the lower block on the
NOTE CONF
left hand side is all made of zeros.
And as we've seen, this is what we get.
NOTE CONF
And as we've seen in the, in the, in the
reading, um, this is much easier to calculate because for
NOTE CONF
an upper or lower triangular block matrix.
The determinant is just the product of the determinant of
NOTE CONF
the blocks and the diagonal.
Okay, we started with 60 terms a little bit less
NOTE CONF
because there were zeros in the original matrix.
Here we do just for the three expansion for the
NOTE CONF
three by three and the two by two block at
the bottom right hand side.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so this is just, um, um, an exercise to
NOTE CONF
really point out that looking at possible structural properties of
the matrix, if you can identify patterns in how the
NOTE CONF
matrix is constructed, you can really count down your computations
with respect to a normal, uh, sort of direct approach.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Well, swapping the columns.
NOTE CONF
Yes, you have you have to keep in mind that
when you swap the column, you change that.
NOTE CONF
And I think I kept track of that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Here.
Don't forget the minus sign.
NOTE CONF
It's all good.
But we need.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, if you see there it's minus the
determinant times the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That is always a good point.
NOTE CONF
Whenever you touch the matrix to manipulate it, you have
to keep track of the three rules that that we've
NOTE CONF
seen above.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then if you want to do the calculations, but
there's really not anything particularly interesting in that you should
NOTE CONF
get assuming I've done the calculations correct myself.
-1014 okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we've seen a 4x4, five by five.
NOTE CONF
Let's do a six by six.
No no no no no no I'm joking I'm joking.
NOTE CONF
There's no six by six today.
Um, let's instead do this one here.
NOTE CONF
Let's go back to a three by three with an
Within with a single element that it's not it's not
NOTE CONF
known.
Um, so before essentially we had a matrix which had
NOTE CONF
a lot of unknowns, but it was either diagonal or
upper triangular, and we could say something about the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Now I'm sort of swapping the the premise here instead
of giving you a matrix with structure, I'm giving you
NOTE CONF
a matrix that you know much better, but it has
just one element which we don't know.
NOTE CONF
And the question is, can we say anything about the
sign of the determinant of that matrix?
NOTE CONF
And do I have a question for this?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
If you go in the book club there's a question
about this itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Think about how the expression of the determinant is constructed.
Or you can try substituting in some values and see
NOTE CONF
what you get.
But essentially I'm asking if you don't know X.
NOTE CONF
Can you tell me anything about the determinant of being
positive negative or zero?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
let's have a look at what the answers are coming
NOTE CONF
in.
I'll give you a few more seconds to vote.
NOTE CONF
Just because I see that only 50 have voted.
Try to make up your mind and send me a
NOTE CONF
yes or no.
But it's not a yes or no.
NOTE CONF
It's a multiple choice.
But I mean.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm going to uncover the answers now.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So the majority of you, almost two thirds think that
there's no enough there's not enough information.
NOTE CONF
And, um, that would be the correct answer.
But why?
NOTE CONF
Well, this matrix has no structure, right?
There's no result.
NOTE CONF
Theorem, proposition.
Corollary.
NOTE CONF
We can hope.
can in our help.
NOTE CONF
So the best approach to do this is to just
calculate the determinant in the boring way of expanding along
NOTE CONF
row of or a column.
Now, because we want to isolate X, because we want
NOTE CONF
to study what what the dependence on X is would
be smart to choose either the third column or the
NOTE CONF
second row, because then x is not in another determinant.
It just appears as one coefficient multiplying another determinant, which
NOTE CONF
is just a number.
And what I mean by that is is this if
NOTE CONF
we do, uh, let's expand it along the third column,
we get that and X is still our unknown.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Just for reference, let's have a look at the matrix
NOTE CONF
back.
So I'm going to multiply one then x.
NOTE CONF
Then three x has the minus because of the rules
of the signs.
NOTE CONF
And the rest are the determinants of the two by
two remaining.
NOTE CONF
And this does this help you?
No.
NOTE CONF
I see head shaking.
It doesn't help you.
NOTE CONF
But what if I tell you that those determinants are
just numbers.
NOTE CONF
You can just calculate those determinants.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The first one is ten minus two eight.
The second one is ten minus three seven.
NOTE CONF
And the third one is eight -12 minus four.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Sorry four -12 minus eight.
Um let's try and do that.
NOTE CONF
And we get the determinant.
And x are, are related by uh essentially what is
NOTE CONF
a line.
It's minus seven x minus six okay.
NOTE CONF
So obviously if we write the determinant as y and
we plot it in the plane, and then we study
NOTE CONF
the sign of our determinant for some values of x,
the determinant will be, uh, negative for some values will
NOTE CONF
be zero and for some values will be positive.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And in particular for minus six seventh that matrix reduces
to a matrix with zero determinant.
NOTE CONF
You can go back and check why that is.
It will make it so you can express the third
NOTE CONF
row as combination of the first two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I invite you to go back and check that for
minus six seven, always assuming that my calculations are right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, finally we have just shy of five minutes to
go.
NOTE CONF
Um, the last question, um, which is, uh, sum up
of everything we've seen today.
NOTE CONF
I'm telling you, I'm giving you some properties.
Some may be real, some may be made up by
NOTE CONF
me this morning.
And I'm asking you which ones are actually true.
NOTE CONF
And you have a few options on this.
Some of them.
NOTE CONF
All of them.
None of them.
NOTE CONF
Only a combinations of them.
Take.
NOTE CONF
Take your time to discuss.
I'll give you two minutes, because this one I can
NOTE CONF
prove to you in, in just a couple of minutes
at the end.
NOTE CONF
Just just something.
Note that some of them say a i.j.
NOTE CONF
The second and the fourth one are I.
So I'm just talking about the diagonal.
NOTE CONF
Just something to be aware of because sometimes it's easy
to, uh, misinterpret a J with a with I.
NOTE CONF
All right, let's see the results.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's a good mixture of two.
Seems to be the preferred ones, but there's also a
NOTE CONF
fair amount of people that they think that I just
wake up this morning and decided to make up for
NOTE CONF
properties out of nowhere.
And the funny thing is, they're right.
NOTE CONF
I just that's how I spend my mornings anyway.
So yes, they're all made up.
NOTE CONF
I just made up.
And this is this plugs into the main in the
NOTE CONF
into the main message that I would like you to
take home today, which is at least for determinants, the
NOTE CONF
structure of the matrix is much more important than the
actual values that it's that it contains.
NOTE CONF
And if you go back and see the other exercises
that we've done, they all sort of hint towards that.
NOTE CONF
If you have some structure, it's easy to tell something
about the determinant of the matrix, even with incomplete information.
NOTE CONF
If you know everything about the values but you are
having complete information about the structure, then it's very hard
NOTE CONF
to do anything.
And how very quickly.
NOTE CONF
We still have a minute.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Very quickly.
Can we give some can we give some counterexamples to
NOTE CONF
show that they they are wrong, and I'm just going
to write them down so you can check at home
NOTE CONF
because the lecture is almost done.
And the counterexample for one, you can look at the
NOTE CONF
matrix one to.
Two, one for number two you can look at 0110.
NOTE CONF
For number three you can look at minus two, minus
two, minus one, minus one.
NOTE CONF
And for the last one possibly the easiest one you
could look at just the the the matrix that has
NOTE CONF
all ones.
And all of that will um, will show you that
NOTE CONF
while the premise, like the hypothesis is satisfied, the determinant
does not, um, does not satisfy the property that I
NOTE CONF
just invented this morning.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Thank you for coming.
I'll see you tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Same time, same place.